# Introduction
The class ``TemplateParser`` implements light wiki template parser, main logic is included in less than three hundred lines.
The Java Wiktionary parser converts Wiktionary wikicode to HTML using ``TemplateParser`` and ``WikiFormatter``.
``TemplateParser`` performs wikicode parsing, template expansion, parser functions execution and module processing.
``WikiFormatter`` formats the expanded wikitext to HTML.
Main software is written in Java and uses LUA modules from Wikimedia.

The library has been developed to parse and render English Wiktionary, starting from the dump **enwiktionary-latest-pages-articles.xml.bz2** available in https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiktionary/latest/

As an example of a wiktionary definition parsed by ``TemplateParser`` and rendered by ``WikiFormatter``, please look at [time](wiki.html) definition.

# WikiSplitter
The ``WikiSplitter`` tool generates files wiki.dat, templates.dat and modules.dat from a wikimedia dump.
```
compile: javac -encoding UTF-8 wiki\WikiSplitter.java
usage:  java wiki.WikiSplitter <filename>
```
After the execution of ``WikiSplitter``, file **wiki.dat** will contain all the definitions in a plain text file, **templates.dat** will contain all templates in a plain text file and **modules.dat** will contain all modules in a plain text file. These files are needed for further processing.
# Usage example

Using the wiki parser is quite simple, once you have generated \*.dat files with ``WikiExtract``, your own code can parse wikitext, expand it and render to html in two steps:
* parse and expand wikitest with ``tp.parse()``
* format expanded text to html with ``WikiFormatter.formatWikiText()``
Before doing these steps, you shall instantiate the helper ``WikiPage`` to guide the parser in the wiki expansion with information like date, locale, templates, modules.

Here is the typical code to perform wikitext parsing/expansion and rendering to html:
```java
TemplateParser tp = new TemplateParser();
WikiPage wp = new WikiPage(keyword,  date, Locale.ENGLISH, tp, name2template, name2module, false, name2content, true);
String expanded = tp.parse(definition, wp);
String formatted = WikiFormatter.formatWikiText(new StringBuilder(keyword), new StringBuilder(expanded), linkBaseURL);
```
The string ``formatted`` will contain the html related to the given definition. 
In the ``wiki`` folder you can find the WikiFind class that can be used as starting point to write your own application class.
# WikiFind
Class ``WikiFind`` is demo that searchs and renders a wiki page into html format using files wiki.dat, templates.dat and modules.dat generated by WikiSplitter.
```
compile: javac -cp .;lib\luaj-jse-3.0.2p.jar wiki\WikiFind.java
usage:  java -cp .;lib\luaj-jse-3.0.2p.jar wiki.WikiFind <word>
```
# TestSuite
Class ``TestSuite`` performs automatic tests of the wiki parser.
```
compile: javac -encoding UTF-8 -cp .;lib\luaj-jse-3.0.2p.jar wiki\TestSuite.java
usage: java -cp .;lib\luaj-jse-3.0.2p.jar wiki.TestSuite [test number from 0 to 4] [template to test]

meaning of test number:
0: miscellaneous tests to check features
1: debug test
2: test template expansion, in this case specify also the template to test in the command line, note: requires files templates.dat and modules.dat
3: smoke test, note: requires files wiki.dat, templates.dat and modules.dat
4: parser robustness test

template to test: this parameter is required only for test number 2

```
# Classes
Main classes:
- wiki.TestSuite, a test suite for ``TemplateParser``
- wiki.WikiSplitter, a tool to generate files wiki.dat, templates.dat and modules.dat from a wikimedia dump
- wiki.WikiFind, demo that searchs and renders a wiki page into html format using files wiki.dat, templates.dat and modules.dat generated by ``WikiSplitter``

Wiki parser classes:
- wiki.TemplateParser, parser of wiki templates
- wiki.MagicWords, implementation of wiki magic words
- wiki.NameSpaces, wikipedia namespaces
- wiki.tools.Utilities, miscellaneous utility functions
- wiki.tools.WikiFormatter, html renderer for wikicode not related to templates and modules
- wiki.tools.WikiPage, helper for template expansion
- wiki.tools.WikiScanner, scanner for wiki text
- wiki.parserfunctions.\*, classes that implement wiki parser functions
- wiki.parserfunctions.ParserFunction, abstract class for parser functions
- wiki.parserfunctions.ParserFunctions, dictionary of parser functions

Support libraries:
- info.bliki.extensions.scribunto.\*, classes that implements the interface to luaj, based on https://github.com/axkr/info.bliki.wikipedia_parser 
- info.bliki.wiki.template.dates.\*, classes that emulate the strtotime() php function
- bzip2.\*, classes to unpack bzip2 files

- luaj, java interpreter of Lua language, used to process wiki modules, based on https://github.com/luaj/luaj

- luabit\\\*.lua, lualib\\\*.lua and ustring\\\*.lua: lua scripts, reference: https://github.com/wikimedia/mediawiki-extensions-Scribunto/tree/master/includes/Engines/LuaCommon/lualib

# Caveats
This wiki parser is simplified and light, but has several limitations. It is designed only for english wiktionary.
It does not aim to achieve 100% features of php based wiki parser and it is not tested versus wikipedia.
The parser is not optimized for speed.

# Todo
The following future improvements will enhance the parser:
- implement getEntityTable() in MwText.java to avoid hack in mw.text.lua (function mwtext.decode)
- language localization
- use also aliases defined in NameSpaces, to identify templates and modules
- interwiki links
- implement stubs with real code
- parser functions localurle and fullurle have been implemented as localurl and fullurl, instead they should use htmlspecialchars before returning the result
- implement missing tags, e.g. canonicalurl,  #categorytree and others
- define missing namespaces in class NameSpaces
- implement remaining magic words, e.g. pagesincat, pagesincategory, pagesinnamespace,....
- improve quality of html renderer
- improve performance

# Credits
This software integrates 3pp software to perform specific activities.
The following 3pp are used by this software:
- java lua interpreter luaj: https://github.com/luaj/luaj
- wikimedia lua scripts: https://github.com/wikimedia/mediawiki-extensions-Scribunto/tree/master/includes/Engines/LuaCommon
- java scribunto engine: https://github.com/axkr/info.bliki.wikipedia_parser/tree/master/bliki-core/src/main/java/info/bliki/extensions/scribunto
- java strtotime function: https://github.com/axkr/info.bliki.wikipedia_parser/tree/master/bliki-core/src/main/java/info/bliki/wiki/template/dates/
